Add playground guide (#214)
stacklok/docs-website: docs/toolhive/guides-ui/playground.mdx

---
title: Test MCP servers with playground
description:
  Use the playground feature to test and validate MCP servers directly in the
  ToolHive UI with AI model providers.
---

import useBaseUrl from '@docusaurus/useBaseUrl';
import ThemedImage from '@theme/ThemedImage';

> The playground feature in ToolHive allows you to test and validate MCP servers
> directly within the UI, without requiring additional client setup. This
> streamlined testing environment helps teams quickly evaluate functionality and
> behavior before deploying MCP servers to production environments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ToolHive's playground lets you test and validate MCP servers directly in the UI,
without requiring additional client setup. This streamlined testing environment
helps you quickly evaluate functionality and behavior before deploying MCP
servers to production environments.
```

## Key capabilities

### Instant testing of MCP servers

Enter an AI model API key, select your MCP servers and tools, and begin testing

> immediately—right inside the desktop app. The playground eliminates the friction
> of setting up external AI clients just to validate that your MCP servers are
> working correctly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
immediately in the desktop app. The playground eliminates the friction of
setting up external AI clients just to validate that your MCP servers work
correctly.
```

### Transparent audit logs

See tool details, parameters, and execution results directly in the UI, ensuring
full visibility into tool performance and responses. Every interaction is
logged, making it easy to understand exactly what your MCP servers are doing and

> how they're responding to requests.

Reviewer: I would hesitate to call this "audit" logs...the word has a pretty specific meaning to security/compliance folks, it implies a certain set of data and ability to aggregate.

Also this section makes it sound like ALL tool usage is being logged, but I think the scope is just calls you make while in the playground?

Reviewer: Maybe we just call it "Detailed interaction logs" in the heading then?

Author: sure!

### Integrated ToolHive management

The playground includes a dedicated MCP server for ToolHive itself, allowing you
to manage your MCP servers directly through natural language commands. You can
list servers, check their status, start or stop them, and perform other
management tasks using conversational AI.

## Getting started

To start using the playground feature:

1. **Access the playground**: Click the **Playground** tab in the ToolHive UI
   navigation bar.

2. **Configure API keys**: Click **Configure your API Keys** to set up access to

>    AI model providers.

Reviewer: How does the playground manage/secure these keys? Does it save them along with the other ToolHive secrets so they're encrypted? Worth mentioning if so.

Reviewer: I see. OK, let's roll as-is and we can address it if someone asks.

> - **OpenAI**: Enter your OpenAI API key to use GPT models
> - **Anthropic**: Add your Anthropic API key for Claude models
> - **Google**: Configure Google AI API key for Gemini models
> - **xAI**: Set up xAI API key for Grok models
> - **OpenRouter**: Add OpenRouter API key for access to multiple model providers

Reviewer: I think 3 spaces should work to get these aligned inside the numbered list:

```suggestion
   - **OpenAI**: Enter your OpenAI API key to use GPT models
   - **Anthropic**: Add your Anthropic API key for Claude models
   - **Google**: Configure Google AI API key for Gemini models
   - **xAI**: Set up xAI API key for Grok models
   - **OpenRouter**: Add OpenRouter API key for access to multiple model providers
```

3. **Select MCP tools**: Click the tools icon to manage which MCP servers and
   tools are available in the playground.

<ThemedImage
  alt='ToolHive playground tools management showing available MCP tools'
  sources={{
    light: useBaseUrl(
      '/img/toolhive/toolhive-ui-playground-thv-mcp-light.webp'
    ),
    dark: useBaseUrl('/img/toolhive/toolhive-ui-playground-thv-mcp-dark.webp'),
  }}
  title='MCP tools management interface'
/>

> - View all your running MCP servers
> - Enable or disable specific tools from each server
> - Search and filter tools by name or functionality
> - The `toolhive mcp` server is included by default, providing management
>   capabilities

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - View all your running MCP servers
   - Enable or disable specific tools from each server
   - Search and filter tools by name or functionality
   - The `toolhive mcp` server is included by default, providing management
     capabilities
```

4. **Start testing**: Begin chatting with your chosen AI model. The model will
   have access to all enabled MCP tools and can execute them based on your
   requests.

## Using the playground

### Testing MCP server functionality

The playground is ideal for validating that your MCP servers work as expected:

```text
Can you list all my MCP servers and show their current status?
```

The AI will use the `list_servers` tool from the ToolHive MCP server to provide
a comprehensive overview of your server status.

<ThemedImage
  alt='ToolHive playground showing AI response with MCP tool execution results'
  sources={{
    light: useBaseUrl(
      '/img/toolhive/toolhive-ui-playground-chat-response-light.webp'
    ),
    dark: useBaseUrl(
      '/img/toolhive/toolhive-ui-playground-chat-response-dark.webp'
    ),
  }}
  title='Chat response showing tool execution and results'
/>

> ```text

Reviewer: The second example runs together with the previous screenshot, adding a line should break it up a bit:

```suggestion
Or test that an individual MCP tool is working as expected:

```text
```

  can make intelligent decisions about which servers to start, stop, or
  troubleshoot
- **Reduced complexity**: No need to switch between the chat interface and
  traditional UI controls—everything can be done through conversation
- **Audit trail**: All management operations are logged in the same transparent
  way as tool executions, providing clear visibility into what actions were
  taken

Take advantage of these integrated ToolHive management tools:

```text
Start the fetch MCP server for me
```

```text
Stop all unhealthy MCP servers
```

```text
Show me the logs for the meta-mcp server
```

### Validating tool responses

The playground shows detailed information about each tool execution:

- **Tool name and description**: What tool was called and its purpose
- **Input parameters**: The exact parameters passed to the tool
- **Execution status**: Whether the tool succeeded or failed
- **Response data**: The complete response from the tool
- **Timing information**: How long the tool took to execute

This visibility helps you understand exactly how your MCP servers are behaving
and identify any issues with tool implementation or configuration.

> ## Best practices

Reviewer: Consistency with (most) other docs:

```suggestion
## Recommended practices
```
